Signs and symptoms[edit]
Although bone tissue itself contains no nociceptors, bone fracture is painful for several reasons:[2]

Breaking in the continuity of the periosteum, with or without similar discontinuity in endosteum, as both contain multiple pain receptors.
Edema of nearby soft tissues caused by bleeding of torn periosteal blood vessels evokes pressure pain.
Muscle spasms trying to hold bone fragments in place. Sometimes also followed by cramping.
Damage to adjacent structures such as nerves or vessels, spinal cord and nerve roots (for spine fractures), or cranial contents (for skull fractures) can cause other specific signs and symptoms.

Pathophysiology[edit]
Main article: Bone healing
The natural process of healing a fracture starts when the injured bone and surrounding tissues bleed, forming a fracture hematoma. The blood coagulates to form a blood clot situated between the broken fragments. Within a few days, blood vessels grow into the jelly-like matrix of the blood clot. The new blood vessels bring phagocytes to the area, which gradually remove the non-viable material. The blood vessels also bring fibroblasts in the walls of the vessels and these multiply and produce collagen fibres. In this way the blood clot is replaced by a matrix of collagen. Collagen's rubbery consistency allows bone fragments to move only a small amount unless severe or persistent force is applied.

At this stage, some of the fibroblasts begin to lay down bone matrix in the form of collagen monomers. These monomers spontaneously assemble to form the bone matrix, for which bone crystals (calcium hydroxyapatite) are deposited in amongst, in the form of insoluble crystals. This mineralization of the collagen matrix stiffens it and transforms it into bone. In fact, bone is a mineralized collagen matrix; if the mineral is dissolved out of bone, it becomes rubbery. Healing bone callus is on average sufficiently mineralized to show up on X-ray within 6 weeks in adults and less in children. This initial "woven" bone does not have the strong mechanical properties of mature bone. By a process of remodeling, the woven bone is replaced by mature "lamellar" bone. The whole process can take up to 18 months, but in adults the strength of the healing bone is usually 80% of normal by 3 months after the injury.

Several factors can help or hinder the bone healing process. For example, any form of nicotine hinders the process of bone healing,[3] and adequate nutrition (including calcium intake) will help the bone healing process. Weight-bearing stress on bone, after the bone has healed sufficiently to bear the weight, also builds bone strength. Although there are theoretical concerns about NSAIDs slowing the rate of healing, there is not enough evidence to warrant withholding the use of this type analgesic in simple fractures.[4]

Effects of smoking[edit]
Smokers generally have lower bone density than non-smokers, so have a much higher risk of fractures. There is also evidence that smoking delays bone healing. Some research indicates, for example, that it delays tibial shaft fracture healing from a median healing time of 136 to 269 days.[5] This means that the fracture healing time was approximately doubled in smokers. Although some other studies show less extreme effects, it is still shown that smoking delays fracture healing.

Diagnosis[edit]

Radiography to identify possible fractures after a knee injury.
A bone fracture may be diagnosed based on the history given and the physical examination performed. Radiographic imaging is often performed, to confirm the diagnosis. Under certain circumstances, radiographic examination of the nearby joints is indicated in order to exclude dislocations and fracture-dislocations. In situations where projectional radiography alone is insufficient, Computed Tomography (CT) or Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) may be indicated.

Classification[edit]
"Compound Fracture" redirects here. For the 2013 horror film, see Compound Fracture (film).

Compare healthy bone with different types of fractures:
   (a) closed fracture
   (b) open fracture
   (c) transverse fracture
   (d) spiral fracture
   (e) comminuted fracture
   (f) impacted fracture
   (g) greenstick fracture
   (h) oblique fracture

Open ankle fracture with luxation

Periprosthetic fracture of left femur
In orthopedic medicine, fractures are classified in various ways. Historically they are named after the doctor who first described the fracture conditions. However, there are more systematic classifications in place currently.

Mechanism[edit]
Traumatic fracture – This is a fracture due to sustained trauma. e.g.- Fractures caused by a fall, road traffic accident, fight etc.
Pathologic fracture – A fracture through a bone which has been made weak by some underlying disease is called pathological fracture. e.g.- a fracture through a bone weakened by metastasis. Osteoporosis is the most common cause of pathological fracture.
Periprosthetic fracture – A fracture at the point of mechanical weakness at the end of an implant
Soft-tissue involvement[edit]
Closed fracture: are those in which the overlying skin is intact
Open fracture/Compound fracture: involve wounds that communicate with the fracture, or where fracture hematoma is exposed, and may thus expose bone to contamination. Open injuries carry a higher risk of infection.
Clean fracture
Contaminated fracture
Displacement[edit]
Non-displaced
Displaced
Translated
Angulated
Rotated
Shortened
Fracture pattern[edit]
Linear fracture: A fracture that is parallel to the bone's long axis.
Transverse fracture: A fracture that is at a right angle to the bone's long axis .
Oblique fracture: A fracture that is diagonal to a bone's long axis (more than 30°).
Spiral fracture: A fracture where at least one part of the bone has been twisted.
Compression fracture/Wedge fracture: usually occurs in the vertebrae, for example when the front portion of a vertebra in the spine collapses due to osteoporosis (a medical condition which causes bones to become brittle and susceptible to fracture, with or without trauma).
Impacted fracture: A fracture caused when bone fragments are driven into each other.
Avulsion fracture: A fracture where a fragment of bone is separated from the main mass.
Fragments[edit]
Incomplete fracture: A fracture in which the bone fragments are still partially joined. In such cases, there is a crack in the osseous tissue that does not completely traverse the width of the bone
Complete fracture: A fracture in which bone fragments separate completely.
Comminuted fracture: A fracture in which the bone has broken into several pieces.
Anatomical location[edit]
An anatomical classification may begin with specifying the involved body part, such as the head or arm, followed with more specific localization. Fractures that have additional definition criteria than merely localization can often be classified as subtypes of fractures that merely are, such as a Holstein-Lewis fracture being a subtype of a humerus fracture. However, most typical examples in an orthopedic classification given in previous section cannot appropriately be classified into any specific part of an anatomical classification, as they may apply to multiple anatomical fracture sites.

Skull fracture
Basilar skull fracture
Blowout fracture – a fracture of the walls or floor of the orbit
Mandibular fracture
Nasal fracture
Le Fort fracture of skull – facial fractures involving the maxillary bone and surrounding structures in a usually bilateral and either horizontal, pyramidal or transverse way.
Spinal fracture
Cervical fracture
Fracture of C1, including Jefferson fracture
Fracture of C2, including Hangman's fracture
Flexion teardrop fracture – a fracture of the anteroinferior aspect of a cervical vertebral
Clay-shoveler fracture – fracture through the spinous process of a vertebra occurring at any of the lower cervical or upper thoracic vertebrae
Burst fracture – in which a vertebra breaks from a high-energy axial load
Compression fracture – a collapse of a vertebra, often in the form of wedge fractures due to larger compression anteriorly.
Chance fracture – compression injury to the anterior portion of a vertebral body with concomitant distraction injury to posterior elements
Holdsworth fracture – an unstable fracture dislocation of the thoracolumbar junction of the spine
Rib fracture
Sternal fracture
Shoulder fracture
Clavicle fracture
Scapular fracture
Arm fracture
Humerus fracture (fracture of upper arm)
Supracondylar fracture
Holstein-Lewis fracture – a fracture of the distal third of the humerus resulting in entrapment of the radial nerve.
Forearm fracture
Ulnar fracture
Monteggia fracture – a fracture of the proximal third of the ulna with the dislocation of the head of the radius
Hume fracture – a fracture of the olecranon with an associated anterior dislocation of the radial head
Radius fracture
Essex-Lopresti fracture – a fracture of the radial head with concomitant dislocation of the distal radio-ulnar joint with disruption of the interosseous membrane.[6]
Distal radius fracture
Galeazzi fracture – a fracture of the radius with dislocation of the distal radioulnar joint
Colles' fracture – a distal fracture of the radius with dorsal (posterior) displacement of the wrist and hand
Smith's fracture – a distal fracture of the radius with volar (ventral) displacement of the wrist and hand
Barton's fracture – an intra-articular fracture of the distal radius with dislocation of the radiocarpal joint.
Hand fracture
Scaphoid fracture
Rolando fracture – a comminuted intra-articular fracture through the base of the first metacarpal bone
Bennett's fracture – a fracture of the base of the first metacarpal bone which extends into the carpometacarpal (CMC) joint.[7]
Boxer's fracture – a fracture at the neck of a metacarpal
Pelvic fracture
Fracture of the hip bone
Duverney fracture – an isolated pelvic fracture involving only the iliac wing.
Femoral fracture
Hip fracture (anatomically a fracture of the femur bone and not the hip bone)
Patella fracture
Crus fracture
Tibia fracture
Pilon fracture
Tibial plateau fracture
Bumper fracture – a fracture of the lateral tibial plateau caused by a forced valgus applied to the knee
Segond fracture – an avulsion fracture of the lateral tibial condyle
Gosselin fracture – a fractures of the tibial plafond into anterior and posterior fragments[8]
Toddler's fracture – an undisplaced and spiral fracture of the distal third to distal half of the tibia[9]
Fibular fracture
Maisonneuve fracture – a spiral fracture of the proximal third of the fibula associated with a tear of the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis and the interosseous membrane.
Le Fort fracture of ankle – a vertical fracture of the antero-medial part of the distal fibula with avulsion of the anterior tibiofibular ligament.[8]
Bosworth fracture – a fracture with an associated fixed posterior dislocation of the proximal fibular fragment which becomes trapped behind the posterior tibial tubercle. The injury is caused by severe external rotation of the ankle.[10]
Combined tibia and fibula fracture
Trimalleolar fracture – involving the lateral malleolus, medial malleolus and the distal posterior aspect of the tibia
Bimalleolar fracture – involving the lateral malleolus and the medial malleolus.
Pott's fracture
Foot fracture
Lisfranc fracture – in which one or all of the metatarsals are displaced from the tarsus[11]
Jones fracture – a fracture of the proximal end of the fifth metatarsal
March fracture – a fracture of the distal third of one of the metatarsals occurring because of recurrent stress
Calcaneal fracture
OTA/AO classification[edit]
Main article: Müller AO Classification of fractures
The Orthopaedic Trauma Association Committee for Coding and Classification published its classification system[12] in 1996, adopting a similar system to the 1987 AO Foundation system.[13] In 2007, they extended their system,[14] unifying the 2 systems regarding wrist, hand, foot and ankle fractures.

Classifications named after people[edit]
Main category: Orthopedic classifications
"Denis classification" for spinal fractures[15]
"Frykman classification" for forearm fractures (fractures of radius and ulna)
"Gustilo open fracture classification"[16]
"Letournel and Judet Classification" for Acetabular fractures[17]
"Neer classification" for humerus fractures[18][19]
Seinsheimer classification, Evans-Jensen classification, Pipkin classification and Garden classification for hip fractures
Treatment[edit]

X-ray showing the proximal portion of a fractured tibia with an intramedullary nail.

Proximal femur nail with locking and stabilisation screws for treatment of femur fractures of left thigh.

The surgical treatment of mandibular angle fracture. Fixation of the bone fragments by the plates. The principles of osteosynthesis are stability (immobility of the fragments that creates the conditions for bones coalescence) and functionality.
Treatment of bone fractures are broadly classified as surgical or conservative, the latter basically referring to any non-surgical procedure, such as pain management, immobilization or other non-surgical stabilization. A similar classification is open versus closed treatment, in which open treatment refers to any treatment in which the fracture site is surgically opened, regardless of whether the fracture itself is an open or closed fracture.

Pain management[edit]
In arm fractures in children, ibuprofen has been found to be as effective as a combination of acetaminophen and codeine.[20]

Immobilization[edit]
Since bone healing is a natural process which will most often occur, fracture treatment aims to ensure the best possible function of the injured part after healing. Bone fractures are typically treated by restoring the fractured pieces of bone to their natural positions (if necessary), and maintaining those positions while the bone heals. Often, aligning the bone, called reduction, in good position and verifying the improved alignment with an X-ray is all that is needed. This process is extremely painful without anesthesia, about as painful as breaking the bone itself. To this end, a fractured limb is usually immobilized with a plaster or fiberglass cast or splint which holds the bones in position and immobilizes the joints above and below the fracture. When the initial post-fracture edema or swelling goes down, the fracture may be placed in a removable brace or orthosis. If being treated with surgery, surgical nails, screws, plates and wires are used to hold the fractured bone together more directly. Alternatively, fractured bones may be treated by the Ilizarov method which is a form of external fixator.

Occasionally smaller bones, such as phalanges of the toes and fingers, may be treated without the cast, by buddy wrapping them, which serves a similar function to making a cast. By allowing only limited movement, fixation helps preserve anatomical alignment while enabling callus formation, towards the target of achieving union.

Splinting results in the same outcome as casting in children who have a distal radius fracture with little shifting.[21]

Surgery[edit]
Surgical methods of treating fractures have their own risks and benefits, but usually surgery is done only if conservative treatment has failed, is very likely to fail, or likely to result in a poor functional outcome. With some fractures such as hip fractures (usually caused by osteoporosis), surgery is offered routinely because non-operative treatment results in prolonged immobilisation, which commonly results in complications including chest infections, pressure sores, deconditioning, deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism, which are more dangerous than surgery. When a joint surface is damaged by a fracture, surgery is also commonly recommended to make an accurate anatomical reduction and restore the smoothness of the joint.

Infection is especially dangerous in bones, due to the recrudescent nature of bone infections. Bone tissue is predominantly extracellular matrix, rather than living cells, and the few blood vessels needed to support this low metabolism are only able to bring a limited number of immune cells to an injury to fight infection. For this reason, open fractures and osteotomies call for very careful antiseptic procedures and prophylactic antibiotics.

Occasionally bone grafting is used to treat a fracture.

Sometimes bones are reinforced with metal. These implants must be designed and installed with care. Stress shielding occurs when plates or screws carry too large of a portion of the bone's load, causing atrophy. This problem is reduced, but not eliminated, by the use of low-modulus materials, including titanium and its alloys. The heat generated by the friction of installing hardware can easily accumulate and damage bone tissue, reducing the strength of the connections. If dissimilar metals are installed in contact with one another (i.e., a titanium plate with cobalt-chromium alloy or stainless steel screws), galvanic corrosion will result. The metal ions produced can damage the bone locally and may cause systemic effects as well.

Electrical bone growth stimulation or osteostimulation has been attempted to speed or improve bone healing. Results however do not support its effectiveness.[22]

Complications[edit]

An old fracture with nonunion of the fracture fragments.
Some fractures can lead to serious complications including a condition known as compartment syndrome. If not treated, compartment syndrome can eventually require amputation of the affected limb. Other complications may include non-union, where the fractured bone fails to heal or mal-union, where the fractured bone heals in a deformed manner.

Complications of fractures can be classified into three broad groups depending upon their time of occurrence. These are as follows –

Immediate complications – occurs at the time of the fracture.
Early complications – occurring in the initial few days after the fracture.
Late complications – occurring a long time after the fracture.


Immediate complications	Early complications	Late complications
Systemic
Hypovolaemic shock
Systemic
Hypovolaemic shock
ARDS – Adult respiratory distress syndrome
Fat embolism syndrome
Deep vein thrombosis
Pulmonary syndrome
Aseptic traumatic fever
Septicemia (in open fracture )
Crush syndrome
Imperfect union of the fracture
Delayed union
Non union
Mal union
Cross union
Local
Injury to major vessels
Injury to muscles and tendons
Injury to joints
Injury to viscera
Local
Infection
Compartment syndrome
Others
Avascular necrosis
Shortening
Joint stiffness
Sudeck's dystrophy
Osteomyelitis
Ischaemic contracture
Myositis ossificans
Osteoarthritis
Children[edit]
Main article: Child bone fracture
In children, whose bones are still developing, there are risks of either a growth plate injury or a greenstick fracture.

A greenstick fracture occurs due to mechanical failure on the tension side. That is, since the bone is not as brittle as it would be in an adult, it does not completely fracture, but rather exhibits bowing without complete disruption of the bone's cortex in the surface opposite the applied force.
Growth plate injuries, as in Salter-Harris fractures, require careful treatment and accurate reduction to make sure that the bone continues to grow normally.
Plastic deformation of the bone, in which the bone permanently bends but does not break, is also possible in children. These injuries may require an osteotomy (bone cut) to realign the bone if it is fixed and cannot be realigned by closed methods.
Certain fractures are known to occur mainly in the pediatric age group, such as fracture of the clavicle & supracondylar fracture of the humerus.
See also[edit]
Stress fracture
Distraction osteogenesis
Rickets
Catagmatic
H. Winnett Orr, US Army surgeon who developed Orthopedic plaster casts
A significant percentage of bone fractures occur because of high force impact or stress.

However, a fracture may also be the result of some medical conditions which weaken the bones, for example osteoporosis, some cancers or osteogenesis imperfecta.

A fracture caused by a medical condition is known as a pathological fracture.

Contents of this article:

Types of fracture, symptoms and causes of fractures
Diagnosis, treatment, complications and prevention of bone fractures
Fast facts on fractures
Here are some key points about fractures. More detail and supporting information is in the main article.
Most bone fractures are caused by falls and accidents
Bone fractures caused by disease are referred to as pathological fractures
A compound fracture is one that also causes injury to the overlying skin
Around half of women over 50 years of age will have a fracture
There are a number of different types of fractures, including avulsion, comminuted and hairline fractures
Symptoms of bone fractures include pain, swelling and bruising
Stress fractures resulting from repetitive movements are relatively common
The best way to diagnose a fracture is by X-ray
Bone healing is a natural process, treatment revolves around giving the bone optimum conditions to heal itself.
What is a bone fracture?
The word "break" is commonly used by lay (non-professional) people.

[X-ray hands and wrists]
Fractures can occur in any bone of the body.
Among health care professionals, especially bone specialists, such as orthopedic surgeons, "break" is a much less common term when talking about bones.

A crack (not only a break) in the bone is also known as a fracture. Fractures can occur in any bone in the body.

There are several different ways in which a bone can fracture; for example a clean break to the bone that does not damage surrounding tissue or tear through the skin is known as a closed fracture or a simple fracture.

On the other hand, one that damages surrounding skin or tissue is known as a compound fracture or an open fracture. Compound or open fractures are generally more serious than simple fractures, with a much higher risk of infection.

Most human bones are surprisingly strong and can generally stand up to fairly strong impacts or forces. However, if that force is too powerful, or there is something wrong with the bone, it can fracture.

The older we get the less force our bones can withstand. Approximately 50% of women and about 20% of men have a fracture after they are 50 years old (Source: National Health Service, UK).

Because children's bones are more elastic, when they do have fractures they tend to be different. Children also have growth plates at the end of their bones - areas of growing bone - which may sometimes be damaged.

Types of bone fracture
Avulsion fracture - a muscle or ligament pulls on the bone, fracturing it

Comminuted fracture - the bone is shattered into many pieces

Compression (crush) fracture - generally occurs in the spongy bone in the spine. For example, the front portion of a vertebra in the spine may collapse due to osteoporosis

Fracture dislocation - a joint becomes dislocated, and one of the bones of the joint has a fracture

Greenstick fracture - the bone partly fractures on one side, but does not break completely because the rest of the bone can bend. More common among children, whose bones are softer and more elastic

Hairline fracture - a partial fracture of the bone. Often this type of fracture is harder to detect

Impacted fracture - when the bone is fractured, one fragment of bone goes into another

Longitudinal fracture - the break is along the length of the bone

Oblique fracture - A fracture that is diagonal to a bone's long axis

Pathological fracture - when an underlying disease or condition has already weakened the bone, resulting in a fracture (bone fracture caused by an underlying disease/condition that weakened the bone)

Spiral fracture - A fracture where at least one part of the bone has been twisted

Stress fracture - more common among athletes. A bone breaks because of repeated stresses and strains

Torus (buckle) fracture - bone deforms but does not crack. More common in children. It is painful but stable

Transverse fracture - a straight break right across a bone.
Symptoms of bone fractures
The signs and symptoms of a fracture vary according to which bone is affected, the patient's age and general health, as well as the severity of the injury. However, they may include some of the following:

[Knee X-ray]
Symptoms of a bone fracture can vary wildly depending on the affected region and severity.
Pain
Swelling
Bruising
Discolored skin around the affected area
Angulation - the affected area may be bent at an unusual angle
The patient is unable to put weight on the injured area
The patient cannot move the affected area
The affected bone or joint may have a grating sensation
If it is an open fracture there may be bleeding.

When a large bone is affected, such as the pelvis or femur:

The sufferer may look pale and clammy
There may be dizziness (feeling faint)
Feelings of sickness and nausea.
If possible, do not move a person with a broken bone until a health care professional is present and can assess the situation and, if required, apply a splint. Obviously, if the patient is in a dangerous place, such as in the middle of a busy road, one sometimes has to act before the emergency services arrive.

Causes of bone fractures
The majority of fractures are caused by a bad fall or automobile accident. Healthy bones are extremely tough and resilient and can withstand surprisingly powerful impacts. When people enter old age two factors make their risk of fractures greater; weaker bones and a greater risk of falling.

Children, who tend to have more physically active lifestyles than adults, are also prone to fractures.

People with underlying illnesses and conditions that may weaken their bones also have a higher risk of fractures. Examples include osteoporosis, infection, or a tumor. As mentioned earlier, this type of fracture is known as a pathological fracture.

Stress fractures, which result from repeated stresses and strains, commonly found among professional sports people, are also common causes of fractures.
Bones / Orthopedics
Rehabilitation / Physical Therapy
Fractures: Diagnosis, Treatment, Complications and Prevention

Written by Christian Nordqvist Knowledge center
Last updated: Fri 1 April 2016
email
3.5
213SHARE
4

(Continued from page 1...)

Diagnosing bone fractures
A doctor will carry out a physical examination, identify signs and symptoms and make a diagnosis.

The patient will be interviewed - or friends, relatives or witnesses if the patient cannot communicate properly - and asked about circumstances that clearly caused the injury or may have caused it.

Doctors will often order an X-ray. In some cases an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) or CT (computed tomography) scan may also be ordered.

Treatment of bone fractures[Boy with broken leg]
Medical intervention focuses on supporting the bone as it heals naturally.
Bone healing is a natural process which in most cases will occur automatically. Fracture treatment is usually aimed at making sure there is the best possible function of the injured part after healing.

Treatment also focuses on providing the injured bone with the best circumstances for optimum healing (immobilization).

For the natural healing process to begin, the ends of the broken bone need to be lined up - this is known as reducing the fracture.

The patient is usually asleep under a general anesthetic when fracture reduction is done. Fracture reduction may be done by manipulation, closed reduction (pulling the bone fragments), or surgery.

Immobilization - as soon as the bones are aligned they must stay aligned while they heal. This may include:

Plaster casts or plastic functional braces - these hold the bone in position until it has healed.

Metal plates and screws - current procedures use minimally invasive techniques.

Intra-medullary nails - Internal steel rods are placed down the center of long bones. Flexible wires may be used in children.

External fixators - these may be made of metal or carbon fiber; they have steel pins that go into the bone directly through the skin. They are a type of scaffolding outside the body.
Usually the fractured bone area is immobilized for between two to eight weeks. The duration depends on which bone is affected and whether there are any complications, such as a blood supply problem or an infection.

Healing - if a broken bone has been aligned properly and kept immobile the healing process is usually straightforward.

Osteoclasts (bone cells) absorb old and damaged bone while osteoblasts (other bone cells) are used to create new bone. Callus is formed; callus is new bone which is formed around a fracture. It forms on either side of the fracture and grows towards each end until the fracture gap is filled. Eventually the excess bone smoothes off and the bone is like it used to be before.

The patient's age, which bone is affected, the type of fracture, as well as the patient's general health are all factors which influence how rapidly the bone heals. If the patient smokes regularly the healing process will take longer.

Physical therapy (UK: physiotherapy) - after the bone has healed it may be necessary to restore muscle strength as well as mobility to the affected area. If the fracture occurred near or through a joint there is a risk of permanent stiffness - the individual may not be able to bend that joint as well as before.

Surgery - if there was damage to the skin and soft tissue around the affected bone or joint, plastic surgery may be required.

Delayed unions and non-unions

Non-unions are fractures that fail to heal, while delayed unions are those that take longer to heal.

Ultrasound therapy - low-intensity ultrasound is applied daily to the affected area. This has been found to help the fracture to heal. Studies in this area are still ongoing.

Bone graft - if the fracture does not heal a natural or synthetic bone is transplanted to stimulate the broken bone.

Stem cell therapy - studies are currently underway to see whether stem cells can be used to heal fractures that do not heal.
Complications of a bone fracture
Heals in the wrong position - this is known as a malunion; either the fracture heals in the wrong position or it shifts (the fracture itself shifts).

Disruption of bone growth - if a childhood bone fracture affects both ends of bones, there is a risk that the normal development of that bone may be affected, raising the risk of a subsequent deformity.

Persistent bone or bone marrow infection - if there is a break in the skin, as may happen with a compound fracture, bacteria can get in and infect the bone or bone marrow, which can become a persistent infection (osteomyelitis). Patients may need to be hospitalized and treated with antibiotics. Sometimes surgical drainage and curettage is required.

Bone death (avascular necrosis) - if the bone loses its essential supply of blood it may die.

Prevention of bone fractures[Yoga at sunset]
Vitamin D plays a role in maintaining healthy bones.
Nutrition and sunlight - the human body needs adequate supplies of calcium for healthy bones. Milk, cheese, yoghurt and dark green leafy vegetables are good sources of calcium.

Our body needs vitamin D to absorb calcium - exposure to sunlight, as well as eating eggs and oily fish are good ways of getting vitamin D.

Physical activity - the more weight-bearing exercises you do, the stronger and denser your bones will be.

Examples include skipping, walking, running, and dancing - any exercise where the body pulls on the skeleton.

Older age not only results in weaker bones, but often in less physical activity, which further increases the risk of even weaker bones. It is important for people of all ages to stay physically active.

The (female) menopause - estrogen, which regulates a woman's calcium, starts to drop and continues to do so until after the menopause; levels never come back up to pre-menopausal levels. In other words, calcium regulation is much more difficult after the menopause. Consequently, women need to be especially careful about the density and strength of their bones during and after the menopause.

The following steps may help reduce post-menopausal osteoporosis risk:

Do several short weight-bearing exercise sessions each week
Do not smoke
Consume only moderate quantities of alcohol, or don't drink it
Make sure you get adequate exposure to daylight
Make sure your diet has plenty of calcium-rich foods. For those who find this difficult, talk to your doctor about taking calcium supple
