Paralysis is loss of muscle function for one or more muscles. Paralysis can be accompanied by a loss of feeling (sensory loss) in the affected area if there is sensory damage as well as motor. About 1 in 50 people have been diagnosed with some form of paralysis, transient or permanent.[1] The word comes from the Greek pa????s??, "disabling of the nerves",[2] itself from pa?? (para), "beside, by"[3] and ??s?? (lysis), "loosing"[4] and that from ??? (luo), "to loose".[5] A paralysis accompanied by involuntary tremors is usually called "palsy".[6][7]
Causes[edit]
Paralysis is most often caused by damage in the nervous system, especially the spinal cord. Other major causes are stroke, trauma with nerve injury, poliomyelitis, cerebral palsy, peripheral neuropathy, Parkinson's disease, ALS, botulism, spina bifida, multiple sclerosis, and Guillain-Barré syndrome. Temporary paralysis occurs during REM sleep, and dysregulation of this system can lead to episodes of waking paralysis. Drugs that interfere with nerve function, such as curare, can also cause paralysis.

Pseudoparalysis (pseudo- meaning "false, not genuine", from Greek ?e?d??[8]) is voluntary restriction or inhibition of motion because of pain, incoordination, orgasm, or other cause, and is not due to actual muscular paralysis.[9] In an infant, it may be a symptom of congenital syphilis.[10]

Variations[edit]
Paralysis can occur in localised or generalised forms, or it may follow a certain pattern. Most paralyses caused by nervous-system damage (i.e. spinal cord injuries) are constant in nature; however, some forms of periodic paralysis, including sleep paralysis, are caused by other factors.[11] [12]

Paralysis can occur in newborns due to a congenital defect known as Spina Bifida. Spina Bifida causes one or more of the vertebrae to fail to form vertebral arches within the infant, which allows the spinal cord to protrude from the rest of the spine. In extreme cases, spinal cord function inferior to the missing vertebral arches to cease.[13] This cessation of spinal cord function can result in paralysis of lower extremities. Documented cases of paralysis of the anal sphincter in newborns have been observed when Spina Bifida has gone untreated.[14] While life-threatening, many cases of Spina Bifida can be corrected surgically if operated on within 72 hours of birth.

Ascending paralysis presents in the lower limbs before the upper limbs. It can be associated with:

Guillain–Barré syndrome (another name for this condition is Landry's ascending paralysis)
Tick paralysis[15]
Ascending paralysis contrasts with descending paralysis, which occurs in conditions such as botulism.

Other animals[edit]
Many animal species use paralysing toxins to capture prey, evade predation, or both. It was shown that in stimulated muscles the decrease in frequency of the miniature potentials runs parallel to the decrease in postsynaptic potential as well as to the decrease in muscle contraction. In invertebrates, this clearly indicates that, e.g., Microbracon (wasp genus) venom causes paralysis of the neuromuscular system by acting at a presynaptic site. Philanthus venom inhibits the fast as well as the slow neuromuscular system at identical concentrations. It causes a decrease in the frequency of the miniature potentials without affecting their amplitude significantly.

Invertebrates[edit]
Some species of wasp, to complete the reproductive cycle, the female wasp paralyses a prey item such as a grasshopper and places it in her nest. In the species Philanthus gibbosus, the paralyzed insect (most often a bee species) is coated in a thick layer of pollen. The adult P. gibbosus then lays eggs in the paralysed insect, which is devoured by the larvae when they hatch.[16]

Vertebrates[edit]
A well-known example is the tetrodotoxin of fish species such as Takifugu rubripes, the famously lethal pufferfish of Japanese fugu. This toxin works by binding to sodium channels in nerve cells, preventing the cells' proper function. A non-lethal dose of this toxin results in temporary paralysis. This toxin is also present in many other species ranging from toads to nemerteans.

Paralysis can be seen in breeds of dogs that are chondrodysplastic. These dogs have short legs, and may also have short muzzles. Their intervertebral disc material can calcify and become more brittle. In such cases, the disc may rupture, with disc material ending up in the spinal canal, or rupturing more laterally to press on spinal nerves. A minor rupture may only result in paresis, but a major rupture can cause enough damage to cut off circulation. If no signs of pain can be elicited, surgery should be performed within 24 hours of the incident, to remove the disc material and relieve pressure on the spinal cord. After 24 hours, the chance of recovery declines rapidly, since with continued pressure, the spinal cord tissue deteriorates and dies.

Another type of paralysis is caused by a fibrocartilaginous embolism. This is a microscopic piece of disc material that breaks off and becomes lodged in a spinal artery. Nerves served by the artery will die when deprived of blood.

The German Shepherd Dog is especially prone to developing degenerative myelopathy. This is a deterioration of nerves in the spinal cord, starting in the posterior part of the cord. Dogs so affected will become gradually weaker in the hind legs as nerves die off. Eventually their hind legs become useless. They often also exhibit faecal and urinary incontinence. As the disease progresses, the paresis and paralysis gradually move forward. This disease also affects other large breeds of dogs. It is suspected to be an autoimmune problem.

Cats with a heart murmur may develop blood clots that travel through arteries. If a clot is large enough to block one or both femoral arteries, there may be hind leg paralysis because the major source of blood flow to the hind leg is blocked.

Many snakes exhibit powerful neurotoxins that can cause non-permanent paralysis or death.
What is paralysis?
Highlights
Paralysis is a loss of muscle function in part of your body.
It can be temporary or permanent.
The most common causes are stroke, spinal cord injury, and multiple sclerosis.
Paralysis is a loss of muscle function in part of your body. It can be localized or generalized, partial or complete, and temporary or permanent. Paralysis can affect any part of your body at any time in your life. If you experience it, you probably won’t feel pain in the affected areas.

Your treatment plan and outlook will depend on the underlying cause of your paralysis, as well as your symptoms. Technological innovations and therapeutic interventions may help you maintain your independence and quality of life.

Advertisement

Part 2 of 7: Symptoms
What are the symptoms of paralysis?
Symptoms
The symptoms of paralysis are usually easy to identify. If you experience paralysis, you’ll lose feeling in a specific or widespread area of your body. Sometimes, a tingling or numbing sensation can occur before total paralysis sets in. Paralysis will also make it difficult or impossible for you to control muscles in the affected body parts.

Part 3 of 7: Types
What are the types of paralysis?
 Type 1
Doctors can classify paralysis in many different ways:

Location
Localized paralysis affects only one part of your body, such as your face or hand.

Generalized paralysis is a group of conditions that affect multiple body parts. The types include:

monoplegia, which affects only one arm or leg
hemiplegia, which affects one arm and one leg on the same side of your body
paraplegia, which affects both of your legs
quadriplegia, or tetraplegia, which affects both of your arms and both of your legs
Severity
If you have partial paralysis, you’ll have some control over the muscles in the affected body parts. If you have complete paralysis, you’ll have no control over the muscles in the affected areas.

Duration
Your paralysis may be temporary. For example, Bell's palsy is a condition that can cause temporary paralysis of your face. Strokes can also temporarily paralyze one side of your body. With time and treatment, you may regain some or all of your feeling and coordination.

In other cases, your paralysis may be permanent.

Flaccid or spastic
Flaccid paralysis causes your muscles to shrink and become flabby. It results in muscle weakness. Spastic paralysis involves tight and hard muscles. It can cause your muscles to twitch uncontrollably, or spasm.

Part 4 of 7: Causes
What causes paralysis?
Causes
Some people are born paralyzed. Others develop paralysis due to an accident or a medical condition.

According to the Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation, stroke is the leading cause of paralysis in the United States. It’s responsible for nearly 30 percent of cases. Spinal cord injury accounts for an estimated 23 percent of cases. Multiple sclerosis causes an estimated 17 percent of cases.

Other causes of paralysis include:

cerebral palsy
post-polio syndrome
traumatic brain injury
neurofibromatosis
birth defects
Part 5 of 7: Diagnosis
How is paralysis diagnosed?
Diagnosis
Diagnosing paralysis is often easy, especially when your loss of muscle function is obvious. For internal body parts where paralysis is more difficult to identify, your doctor may use X-rays, CT scans, MRI scans, or other imaging studies.

If you experience a spinal cord injury, they may use myelography to assess your condition. In this procedure, they’ll insert a special dye into the nerves in your spinal cord. This will help them see your nerves more clearly on X-rays. Your doctor may also perform an electromyography. In this procedure, they’ll use sensors to measure electrical activity in your muscles.

Part 6 of 7: Treatments
How is paralysis treated?
Treatment
Your treatment plan will depend on the underlying cause of your paralysis, as well your symptoms. For example, your doctor may prescribe:

surgery or possible amputation
physical therapy
occupational therapy
mobility aids, such as wheelchairs, braces, mobile scooters, or other devices
medications, such as Botox or muscle relaxers, if you have spastic paralysis
In many cases, paralysis isn’t curable. But your healthcare team can recommend a variety of treatments, tools, and strategies to help you manage your symptoms.


Part 7 of 7: Outlook
What is the outlook for people with paralysis?
Outlook
Many people with paralysis never regain mobility or sensation in the affected areas of their bodies. But even if your paralysis isn’t curable, your healthcare team can recommend assistive technologies, therapeutic interventions, or other strategies to help improve your quality of life.

For example, special braces and electronic mobility devices may allow you to move independently. Occupational therapists and other professionals can help modify the following to suit your abilities and needs:

your clothes
your home
your car
your workplace
Your doctor may also recommend lifestyle changes, medications, surgery, or other treatments to help manage potential complications. 