Zika virus is a mosquito-borne flavivirus that was first identified in Uganda in 1947 in monkeys through a network that monitored yellow fever. It was later identified in humans in 1952 in Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. Outbreaks of Zika virus disease have been recorded in Africa, the Americas, Asia and the Pacific. From the 1960s to 1980s, human infections were found across Africa and Asia, typically accompanied by mild illness. The first large outbreak of disease caused by Zika infection was reported from the Island of Yap (Federated States of Micronesia) in 2007. In July 2015 Brazil reported an association between Zika virus infection and Guillain-Barré syndrome. In October 2015 Brazil reported an association between Zika virus infection and microcephaly.

More on the history of Zika virus
Read the latest situation report
Signs and Symptoms

The incubation period (the time from exposure to symptoms) of Zika virus disease is not clear, but is likely to be a few days. The symptoms are similar to other arbovirus infections such as dengue, and include fever, skin rashes, conjunctivitis, muscle and joint pain, malaise, and headache. These symptoms are usually mild and last for 2-7 days.

Complications of Zika virus disease

After a comprehensive review of evidence, there is scientific consensus that Zika virus is a cause of microcephaly and Guillain-Barré syndrome. Intense efforts are continuing to investigate the link between Zika virus and a range of neurological disorders, within a rigorous research framework.

Q&A: Zika virus and complication
Transmission

Zika virus is primarily transmitted to people through the bite of an infected mosquito from the Aedes genus, mainly Aedes aegypti in tropical regions. Aedes mosquitoes usually bite during the day, peaking during early morning and late afternoon/evening. This is the same mosquito that transmits dengue, chikungunya and yellow fever. Sexual transmission of Zika virus is also possible. Other modes of transmission such as blood transfusion are being investigated.

Diagnosis

Infection with Zika virus may be suspected based on symptoms and recent history of travel (e.g. residence in or travel to an area with active Zika virus transmission). A diagnosis of Zika virus infection can only be confirmed through laboratory tests on blood or other body fluids, such as urine, saliva or semen.

Laboratory testing for Zika virus infection
Treatment

Zika virus disease is usually mild and requires no specific treatment. People sick with Zika virus should get plenty of rest, drink enough fluids, and treat pain and fever with common medicines. If symptoms worsen, they should seek medical care and advice. There is currently no vaccine available.

Prevention

Mosquito bites
Protection against mosquito bites is a key measure to prevent Zika virus infection. This can be done by wearing clothes (preferably light-coloured) that cover as much of the body as possible; using physical barriers such as window screens or closing doors and windows; sleeping under mosquito nets; and using insect repellent containing DEET, IR3535 or icaridin according to the product label instructions. Special attention and help should be given to those who may not be able to protect themselves adequately, such as young children, the sick or elderly. Travellers and those living in affected areas should take the basic precautions described above to protect themselves from mosquito bites.

It is important to cover, empty or clean potential mosquito breeding sites in and around houses such as buckets, drums, pots, gutters, and used tyres. Communities should support local government efforts to reduce mosquitoes in their locality. Health authorities may also advise that spraying of insecticides be carried out.

Vector control operations framework for Zika virus
Sexual transmission
Sexual transmission of Zika virus has been documented in several different countries. To reduce the risk of sexual transmission and potential pregnancy complications related to Zika virus infection, the sexual partners of pregnant women, living in or returning from areas where local transmission of Zika virus occurs should practice safer sex (including using condoms) or abstain from sexual activity throughout the pregnancy.

People living in areas where local transmission of Zika virus occurs should also practice safer sex or abstain from sexual activity. In addition, people returning from areas where local transmission of Zika virus occurs should adopt safer sexual practices or abstain from sex for at least 8 weeks after their return, even if they don’t have symptoms. If men experience Zika virus symptoms they should adopt safer sexual practices or consider abstinence for at least 6 months. Those planning a pregnancy should wait at least 8 weeks before trying to conceive if no symptoms of Zika virus infection appear, or 6 months if one or both members of the couple are symptomatic.

Prevention of sexual transmission of Zika virus




WHO response

WHO is supporting countries to control Zika virus disease by taking actions outlined in the “Zika Strategic Response Framework":

Define and prioritize research into Zika virus disease by convening experts and partners.
Enhance surveillance of Zika virus and potential complications.
Strengthen capacity in risk communication to engage communities to better understand risks associated with Zika virus.
Strengthen the capacity of laboratories to detect the virus.
Support health authorities to implement vector control strategies aimed at reducing Aedes mosquito populations.
Prepare recommendations for the clinical care and follow-up of people with complications related to Zika virus infection, in collaboration with experts and other health agencies.
Zika 
How Zika spreads
Zika can be transmitted through

Mosquito bites
From a pregnant woman to her fetus
Sex
Blood transfusion (very likely but not confirmed)

Learn how Zika is transmitted >>

Zika symptoms
	most common symptoms
Many people infected with Zika virus won’t have symptoms or will only have mild symptoms. The most common symptoms of Zika are

Fever
Rash
Joint pain
Conjunctivitis (red eyes)
Other symptoms include:

Muscle pain
Headache
Symptoms can last for several days to a week. People usually don’t get sick enough to go to the hospital, and they very rarely die of Zika. Once a person has been infected with Zika, they are likely to be protected from future infections.


Learn about symptoms >>

Why Zika is risky for some people
Zika infection during pregnancy can cause a birth defect of the brain called microcephaly and other severe fetal brain defects. Other problems have been detected among fetuses and infants infected with Zika virus before birth, such as defects of the eye, hearing deficits, and impaired growth. There have also been increased reports of Guillain-Barré syndrome, an uncommon sickness of the nervous system, in areas affected by Zika.


Learn about risks >>

How to prevent Zika
There is no vaccine to prevent Zika. The best way to prevent diseases spread by mosquitoes is to protect yourself and your family from mosquito bites. Here’s how

	Treat your clothing
Clothing
Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants.
Treat your clothing and gear with permethrin or buy pre-treated items.

	using insect spray
Insect repellant
Use Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellents with one of the following active ingredients:
DEET, picaridin, IR3535, or oil of lemon eucalyptus or para-menthane-diol. Always follow the product label instructions.
When used as directed, these insect repellents are proven safe and effective even for pregnant and breastfeeding women.
Do not use insect repellents on babies younger than 2 months old.
Do not use products containing oil of lemon eucalyptus or para-menthane-diol on children younger than 3 years old.
	Mosquito netting 
At Home
Stay in places with air conditioning and window and door screens to keep mosquitoes outside.
Take steps to control mosquitoes inside and outside your home.
Mosquito netting can be used to cover babies younger than 2 months old in carriers, strollers, or cribs.
Sleep under a mosquito bed net if air conditioned or screened rooms are not available or if sleeping outdoors.
	Using condoms or not having sex to prevent Zika 
Sexual transmission
Prevent sexual transmission of Zika by using condoms or not having sex.


Learn about prevention >>

How Zika is diagnosed
Diagnosis of Zika is based on a person’s recent travel history, symptoms, and test results.
A blood or urine test can confirm a Zika infection.
Symptoms of Zika are similar to other illnesses spread through mosquito bites, like dengue and chikungunya.
Your doctor or other healthcare provider may order tests to look for several types of infections.

Learn about diagnosis >>

	how to treat zika
What to do if you have Zika
There is no specific medicine or vaccine for Zika virus. Treat the symptoms:

Get plenty of rest.
Drink fluids to prevent dehydration.
Take medicine such as acetaminophen to reduce fever and pain.
Do not take aspirin or other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
If you are taking medicine for another medical condition, talk to your healthcare provider before taking additional medication.


Learn about treatment >>

History of Zika
Zika virus was first discovered in 1947 and is named after the Zika Forest in Uganda. In 1952, the first human cases of Zika were detected and since then, outbreaks of Zika have been reported in tropical Africa, Southeast Asia, and the Pacific Islands. Zika outbreaks have probably occurred in many locations. Before 2007, at least 14 cases of Zika had been documented, although other cases were likely to have occurred and were not reported. Because the symptoms of Zika are similar to those of many other diseases, many cases may not have been recognized.

www.cdc.gov/zika CS264558-A May 16, 2016
Current Zika Outbreak
Zika outbreaks are currently
happening in many countries
and territories. The mosquitoes
that can become infected with
and spread Zika live in many
parts of the world, including
parts of the United States.
Specific areas where Zika virus
is spreading are often difficult
to determine and are likely to
change over time. If traveling,
please visit the CDC Travelers’
Health website for the most
recent travel information.
CDC’s Response to Zika
About Zika
Zika virus spreads to people primarily through the bite of an infected
Aedes species mosquito (Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus). People can
also get Zika through sex with a man infected with Zika and it can
be spread from a pregnant woman to her fetus. People can protect
themselves from mosquito bites and getting Zika through sex. This
fact sheet explains who’s most affected and why, symptoms and
treatment, and how to protect against Zika.
How Zika Spreads
The mosquitoes that carry Zika are aggressive daytime
biters, but they can also bite at night. A mosquito becomes
infected when it bites a person already infected with Zika.
That mosquito can then spread the virus by biting more people.
Zika virus can also spread:
? During sex with a man infected with Zika.
? From a pregnant woman to her fetus during pregnancy or around the
time of birth.
? Through blood transfusion (likely but not confirmed).
Zika: The Basics of the Virus
 and How To Protect Against It
Zika Symptoms
Many people infected with Zika
won’t have symptoms or will
only have mild symptoms. The
most common symptoms are
fever, rash, joint pain, or red eyes.
Other common symptoms include
muscle pain and headache.
Symptoms can last for several
days to a week. People usually
don’t get sick enough to go to the
hospital, and they very rarely die
of Zika. Once a person has been
infected with Zika, they are likely to
be protected from future infections.
Symptoms
Conjunctivitis
Joint pain
Fever
Rash
How to Prevent Zika
There is no vaccine to prevent Zika. The best way to prevent diseases spread by mosquitoes
is to protect yourself and your family from mosquito bites. Here’s how:
Why Zika is Risky for Some People
Zika infection during pregnancy can cause fetuses to have a birth defect of the brain
called microcephaly. Other problems have been detected among fetuses and infants
infected with Zika virus before birth, such as defects of the eye, hearing deficits, and
impaired growth. There have also been increased reports of Guillain-Barré syndrome,
an uncommon sickness of the nervous system, in areas affected by Zika.
Repellent Repellent
www.cdc.gov/zika
? Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants.
? Stay in places with air conditioning and window and door screens to keep mosquitoes
outside.
? Take steps to control mosquitoes inside and outside your home.
? Treat your clothing and gear with permethrin or buy pre-treated items.
? Use Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellents. Always follow
the product label instructions.
» When used as directed, these insect repellents are proven safe and effective even
for pregnant and breastfeeding women.
» Do not use insect repellents on babies younger than 2 months old.
» Do not use products containing oil of lemon eucalyptus or para-menthane-diol on
children younger than 3 years old.
? Mosquito netting can be used to cover babies younger than 2 months old in carriers,
strollers, or cribs to protect them from mosquito bites.
? Sleep under a mosquito bed net if air conditioned or screened rooms are not available
or if sleeping outdoors.
? Prevent sexual transmission of Zika by using condoms or not having sex.
Microcephaly
What to do if You Have Zika
There is no specific medicine to treat Zika.
Treat the symptoms:
? Get plenty of rest.
? Drink fluids to prevent dehydration.
? Take medicine such as acetaminophen to
reduce fever and pain.
? Do not take aspirin or other non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs.
? If you are taking medicine for another medical condition, talk to
your healthcare provider before taking additional medication.
To help prevent others from getting sick, strictly follow steps
to prevent mosquito bites during the first week of illness.
Zika virus (ZIKV) is a member of the virus family Flaviviridae and the genus Flavivirus.[3] It is spread by daytime-active Aedes mosquitoes, such as A. aegypti and A. albopictus.[3] Its name comes from the Zika Forest of Uganda, where the virus was first isolated in 1947.[4] Zika virus is related to the dengue, yellow fever, Japanese encephalitis, and West Nile viruses.[4] Since the 1950s, it has been known to occur within a narrow equatorial belt from Africa to Asia. From 2007 to 2016, the virus spread eastward, across the Pacific Ocean to the Americas, where the 2015–16 Zika virus epidemic reached pandemic levels.[5]

The infection, known as Zika fever or Zika virus disease, often causes no or only mild symptoms, similar to a very mild form of dengue fever.[3] While there is no specific treatment, paracetamol (acetaminophen) and rest may help with the symptoms.[6] As of 2016, the illness cannot be prevented by medications or vaccines.[6] Zika can also spread from a pregnant woman to her fetus. This can result in microcephaly, severe brain malformations, and other birth defects.[7][8] Zika infections in adults may result rarely in Guillain–Barré syndrome.[9]

In January 2016, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issued travel guidance on affected countries, including the use of enhanced precautions, and guidelines for pregnant women including considering postponing travel.[10][11] Other governments or health agencies also issued similar travel warnings,[12][13][14] while Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, and Jamaica advised women to postpone getting pregnant until more is known about the risks.
Virology[edit]
File:Zika virus video osmosis.webm
A video explanation of the Zika virus and of Zika fever
The Zika virus belongs to the Flaviviridae family and the Flavivirus genus, and is thus related to the dengue, yellow fever, Japanese encephalitis, and West Nile viruses. Like other flaviviruses, Zika virus is enveloped and icosahedral and has a nonsegmented, single-stranded, 10 kilobase positive-sense RNA genome. It is most closely related to the Spondweni virus and is one of the two viruses in the Spondweni virus clade.[18][19][20][21][22]


Cross-section of Zika virus, with capsid layer (pink), membrane layer (purple), and RNA genome (yellow)[23]
A positive-sense RNA genome can be directly translated into viral proteins. In other flaviviruses, such as the similarly sized West Nile virus, the RNA genome genes encode seven nonstructural proteins and three structural proteins. The structural proteins encapsulate the virus. The replicated RNA strand is held within a nucleocapsid formed from 12-kDa protein blocks; the capsid is contained within a host-derived membrane modified with two viral glycoproteins. Replication of the viral genome would first require creation of an anti-sense nucleotide strand.[24]

There are two lineages of Zika: the African lineage and the Asian lineage.[25] Phylogenetic studies indicate that the virus spreading in the Americas is 89% identical to African genotypes, but is most closely related to the Asian strain that circulated in French Polynesia during the 2013–2014 outbreak.[25][26][27]

Transmission[edit]
The vertebrate hosts of the virus were primarily monkeys in a so-called enzootic mosquito-monkey-mosquito cycle, with only occasional transmission to humans. Before the current pandemic began in 2007, Zika "rarely caused recognized 'spillover' infections in humans, even in highly enzootic areas". Infrequently, however, other arboviruses have become established as a human disease and spread in a mosquito–human–mosquito cycle, like the yellow fever virus and the dengue fever virus (both flaviviruses), and the chikungunya virus (a togavirus).[28] Though the reason for the pandemic is unknown, dengue, a related arbovirus that infects the same species of mosquito vectors, is known in particular to be intensified by urbanization and globalization.[29]

Mosquito[edit]
Aedes aegypti predicted distribution
Global Aedes aegypti predicted distribution. The map depicts the probability of occurrence (blue=none, red=highest occurrence).
Zika is primarily spread by the female Aedes aegypti mosquito, which is active mostly in the daytime. The mosquitos must feed on blood in order to lay eggs.[30]:2 The virus has also been isolated from a number of arboreal mosquito species in the Aedes genus, such as A. africanus, A. apicoargenteus, A. furcifer, A. hensilli, A. luteocephalus and A. vittatus, with an extrinsic incubation period in mosquitoes of about 10 days.[21]

The true extent of the vectors is still unknown. Zika has been detected in many more species of Aedes, along with Anopheles coustani, Mansonia uniformis, and Culex perfuscus, although this alone does not incriminate them as a vector.[31]

Transmission by A. albopictus, the tiger mosquito, was reported from a 2007 urban outbreak in Gabon where it had newly invaded the country and become the primary vector for the concomitant chikungunya and dengue virus outbreaks.[32] There is concern for autochthonous infections in urban areas of European countries infested by A. albopictus because the first two cases of laboratory-confirmed Zika infections imported into Italy were reported from viremic travelers returning from French Polynesia.[33]

The potential societal risk of Zika can be delimited by the distribution of the mosquito species that transmit it. The global distribution of the most cited carrier of Zika, A. aegypti, is expanding due to global trade and travel.[34] A. aegypti distribution is now the most extensive ever recorded – across all continents including North America and even the European periphery (Madeira, the Netherlands, and the northeastern Black Sea coast).[35] A mosquito population capable of carrying Zika has been found in a Capitol Hill neighborhood of Washington, D. C., and genetic evidence suggests they survived at least four consecutive winters in the region. The study authors conclude that mosquitos are adapting for persistence in a northern climate.[36]

Since 2015, news reports have drawn attention to the spread of Zika in Latin America and the Caribbean.[37] The countries and territories that have been identified by the Pan American Health Organisation as having experienced "local Zika virus transmission" are Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Martinique, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Puerto Rico, Saint Martin, Suriname, and Venezuela.[38][39][40]

Research into its ecological niche suggests that Zika may be influenced to a greater degree by changes in precipitation and temperature than Dengue, making it more likely to be confined to tropical areas. However, rising global temperatures would allow for the disease vector to expand their range further north, allowing Zika to follow.[41]

Sexual[edit]
Zika can be transmitted from a man to his sex partners.[42] As of April 2016 sexual transmission of Zika has been documented in six countries – Argentina, Chile, France, Italy, New Zealand and the United States – during the 2015 outbreak.[9]

In 2014, Zika capable of growth in lab culture was found in the semen of a man at least two weeks (and possibly up to 10 weeks) after he fell ill with Zika fever.[43][44] In 2011 a study found that a United States biologist who had been bitten many times while studying mosquitoes in Senegal developed symptoms six days after returning home in August 2008, but not before having unprotected intercourse with his wife, who had not been outside the US since 2008. Both husband and wife were confirmed to have Zika antibodies, raising awareness of the possibility of sexual transmission.[43][45] In early February 2016, the Dallas County Health and Human Services department reported that a man from Texas who had not travelled abroad had been infected after his male monogamous sexual partner had anal penetrative sex with him one day before and one day after onset of symptoms.[43][46][47] As of February 2016, fourteen additional cases of possible sexual transmission have been under investigation, but it remained unknown whether women can transmit Zika to their sexual partners.[48] At that time, the understanding of the "incidence and duration of shedding in the male genitourinary tract [was] limited to one case report." Therefore, the CDC interim guideline recommended against testing men for purposes of assessing the risk of sexual tranmission.[43]

As of March 2016, the CDC updated its recommendations about length of precautions for couples, and advised that heterosexual couples with men who have confirmed Zika fever or symptoms of Zika should consider using condoms or not having penetrative sex (i.e., vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse, or fellatio) for at least 6 months after symptoms begin. This includes men who live in—and men who traveled to—areas with Zika. Couples with men who traveled to an area with Zika, but did not develop symptoms of Zika, should consider using condoms or not having sex for at least 8 weeks after their return in order to minimize risk. Couples with men who live in an area with Zika, but have not developed symptoms, might consider using condoms or not having sex while there is active Zika transmission in the area.[49]

Pregnancy[edit]
The Zika virus can spread from an infected mother to her fetus during pregnancy or at delivery.[50]

Blood transfusion[edit]
As of April 2016, two cases of Zika transmission through blood transfusions have been reported globally, both from Brazil,[51] after which the US Food and Drug Administration recommended screening blood donors and deferring high-risk donors for 4 weeks.[52][53] A potential risk had been suspected based on a blood-donor screening study during the French Polynesian Zika outbreak, in which 2.8% (42) of donors from November 2013 and February 2014 tested positive for Zika RNA and were all asymptomatic at the time of blood donation. Eleven of the positive donors reported symptoms of Zika fever after their donation, but only three of 34 samples grew in culture.[54]

Pathogenesis[edit]
Zika replicates in the mosquito's midgut epithelial cells and then its salivary gland cells. After 5–10 days, ZIKV can be found in the mosquito’s saliva, which can then infect humans. If the mosquito’s saliva is inoculated into human skin, the virus can infect epidermal keratinocytes, skin fibroblasts in the skin and the Langerhans cells. The pathogenesis of the virus is hypothesized to continue with a spread to lymph nodes and the bloodstream.[18][55] Flaviviruses generally replicate in the cytoplasm, but Zika antigens have been found in infected cell nuclei.[56]

Zika fever[edit]
Main article: Zika fever

Rash on an arm due to Zika
Zika fever (also known as Zika virus disease) is an illness caused by the Zika virus.[57] Most cases have no symptoms, but when present they are usually mild and can resemble dengue fever.[57][58] Symptoms may include fever, red eyes, joint pain, headache, and a maculopapular rash.[57][59][60] Symptoms generally last less than seven days.[59] It has not caused any reported deaths during the initial infection.[58] Infection during pregnancy causes microcephaly and other brain malformations in some babies.[7][8] Infections in adults has been linked to Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS).[58]

Diagnosis is by testing the blood, urine, or saliva for the presence of Zika virus RNA when the person is sick.[57][59]

Prevention involves decreasing mosquito bites in areas where the disease occurs and proper use of condoms.[59][61] Efforts to prevent bites include the use of insect repellent, covering much of the body with clothing, mosquito nets, and getting rid of standing water where mosquitoes reproduce.[57] There is no effective vaccine.[59] Health officials recommended that women in areas affected by the 2015–16 Zika outbreak consider putting off pregnancy and that pregnant women not travel to these areas.[59][62] While there is no specific treatment, paracetamol (acetaminophen) and rest may help with the symptoms.[6][59] Admission to hospital is rarely necessary.[58]

Vaccine development[edit]
Effective vaccines exist for several viruses of the flaviviridae family, namely yellow fever vaccine, Japanese encephalitis vaccine, and tick-borne encephalitis vaccine since the 1930s, and dengue fever vaccine since the mid-2010s.[63][64][65] WHO experts have suggested that the priority should be to develop inactivated vaccines and other non-live vaccines, which are safe to use in pregnant women and those of childbearing age.[66]

The NIH Vaccine Research Center (U.S.) began work towards developing a vaccine for Zika per a January 2016 report.[67] Bharat Biotech International (India) reported in early February 2016, that it was working on vaccines for Zika[68] using two approaches: "recombinant", involving genetic engineering, and "inactivated", where the virus is incapable of reproducing itself but can still trigger an immune response with animal trials of the inactivated version to commence in late February.[69] As of March 2016, 18 companies and institutions internationally were developing vaccines against Zika, but none had yet reached clinical trials.[66] The first human trial for Zika vaccine, a synthetic DNA vaccine (GLS-5700) developed by Inovio Pharmaceuticals, is approved by FDA in June 2016. Interim results of the Phase 1 study is expected in later 2016. [70] Nikos Vasilakis of the UTMB predicted that it may take two years to develop a vaccine, but ten to twelve years may be needed before an effective Zika vaccine is approved by regulators for public use.[71]

A single dose of two distinct vaccine candidates (DNA and inactivated virus vaccine) protected mice against the Zika virus.[72]

History[edit]
See also: Zika fever § Epidemiology, and Zika virus outbreak timeline

Countries that have past or current evidence of Zika transmission (as of January 2016)[73]

Spread of Zika[27][74][75]

Spread of Zika in Africa and Asia, based on molecular sequence data
Virus isolation in monkeys and mosquitoes, 1947[edit]
The virus was first isolated in April 1947 from a rhesus macaque monkey that had been placed in a cage in the Zika Forest of Uganda, near Lake Victoria, by the scientists of the Yellow Fever Research Institute.[76] A second isolation from the mosquito A. africanus followed at the same site in January 1948.[77] When the monkey developed a fever, researchers isolated from its serum a "filterable transmissible agent" that was named Zika in 1948.[21][78]

First evidence of human infection, 1952[edit]
Zika had been known to infect humans from the results of serological surveys in Uganda and Nigeria, published in 1952: Among 84 people of all ages, 50 individuals had antibodies to Zika, and all above 40 years of age were immune.[79] A 1952 research study conducted in India had shown a "significant number" of Indians tested for Zika had exhibited an immune response to the virus, suggesting it had long been widespread within human populations.[80]

It was not until 1954 that the isolation of Zika from a human was published. This came as part of a 1952 outbreak investigation of jaundice suspected to be yellow fever. It was found in the blood of a 10-year-old Nigerian female with low-grade fever, headache, and evidence of malaria, but no jaundice, who recovered within three days. Blood was injected into the brain of laboratory mice, followed by up to 15 mice passages. The virus from mouse brains was then tested in neutralization tests using rhesus monkey sera specifically immune to Zika. In contrast, no virus was isolated from the blood of two infected adults with fever, jaundice, cough, diffuse joint pains in one and fever, headache, pain behind the eyes and in the joints. Infection was proven by a rise in Zika-specific serum antibodies.[79]

Spread in equatorial Africa and to Asia, 1951–1983[edit]
From 1951 through 1983, evidence of human infection with Zika was reported from other African countries, such as the Central African Republic, Egypt, Gabon, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, and Uganda, as well as in parts of Asia including India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam and Pakistan.[21][81] From its discovery until 2007, there were only 14 confirmed human cases of Zika infection from Africa and Southeast Asia.[82]

Micronesia, 2007[edit]
Main article: 2007 Yap Islands Zika virus outbreak
In April 2007, the first outbreak outside of Africa and Asia occurred on the island of Yap in the Federated States of Micronesia, characterized by rash, conjunctivitis, and arthralgia, which was initially thought to be dengue, chikungunya, or Ross River disease.[83] Serum samples from patients in the acute phase of illness contained RNA of Zika. There were 49 confirmed cases, 59 unconfirmed cases, no hospitalizations, and no deaths.[84]

2013–2014[edit]
Oceania[edit]
[icon]	This section requires expansion. (February 2016)
Main article: 2013–2014 Zika virus outbreaks in Oceania
Between 2013 and 2014, further epidemics occurred in French Polynesia, Easter Island, the Cook Islands, and New Caledonia.[17]

Other cases[edit]
On 22 March 2016 Reuters reported that Zika was isolated from a 2014 blood sample of an elderly man in Chittagong in Bangladesh as part of a retrospective study.[85]

Americas, 2015–present[edit]
Main article: Zika virus outbreak (2015–present)
As of early 2016, a widespread outbreak of Zika was ongoing, primarily in the Americas. The outbreak began in April 2015 in Brazil, and has spread to other countries in South America, Central America, Mexico, and the Caribbean. In January 2016, the WHO said the virus was likely to spread throughout most of the Americas by the end of the year;[86] and in February 2016, the WHO declared the cluster of microcephaly and Guillain–Barré syndrome cases reported in Brazil – strongly suspected to be associated with the Zika outbreak – a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.[4][87][88][89] It is estimated that 1.5 million people have been infected by Zika in Brazil,[90] with over 3,500 cases of microcephaly reported between October 2015 and January 2016.[91]

A number of countries have issued travel warnings, and the outbreak is expected to significantly impact the tourism industry.[4][92] Several countries have taken the unusual step of advising their citizens to delay pregnancy until more is known about the virus and its impact on fetal development.[15] With the 2016 Olympics Games set to be hosted in Rio de Janeiro, health officials worldwide have voiced concerns over a potential crisis, both in Brazil and when international athletes and tourists, who may be unknowingly infected, return home and possibly spread the virus. Some researchers speculate that only one or two tourists may be infected during the three week period, or approximately 3.2 infections per 100,000 tourists.