Chickenpox, also known as varicella, is a highly contagious disease caused by the initial infection with varicella zoster virus (VZV).[1] The disease results in a characteristic skin rash that forms small, itchy blisters, which eventually scab over.[2] It usually starts on the chest, back, and face then spreads to the rest of the body.[2] Other symptoms may include fever, feeling tired, and headaches.[2] Symptoms usually last five to ten days.[2] Complications may occasionally include pneumonia, inflammation of the brain, or bacterial infections of the skin among others.[3] The disease is often more severe in adults than children.[4] Symptoms begin ten to twenty one days after exposure to the virus.

Chickenpox is an airborne disease which spreads easily through the coughs and sneezes of an infected person.[5] It may be spread from one to two days before the rash appears until all lesions have crusted over.[5] It may also spread through contact with the blisters.[5] Those with shingles may spread chickenpox to those who are not immune through contact with the blisters.[5] The disease can usually be diagnosed based on the presenting symptom;[6] however, in unusual cases may be confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing of the blister fluid or scabs.[4] Testing for antibodies may be done to determine if a person is or is not immune.[4] People usually only get the disease once.

The varicella vaccine has resulted in a decrease in the number of cases and complications from the disease.[7] It protects about 70 to 90 percent of people from disease with a greater benefit for severe disease.[4] Routine immunization of children is recommended in many countries.[8] Immunization within three days of exposure may improve outcomes in children.[9] Treatment of those infected may include calamine lotion to help with itching, keeping the fingernails short to decrease injury from scratching, and the use of paracetamol (acetaminophen) to help with fevers.[5] For those at increased risk of complications antiviral medication such as aciclovir are recommended.

Chickenpox occurs in all parts of the world.[4] As of 2013 140 million cases of chickenpox and herpes zoster occurred.[10] Before routine immunization the number of cases occurring each year was similar to the number of people born.[4] Since immunization the number of infections in the United States has decreased nearly 90%.[4] In 2013 chickenpox resulted in 7,000 deaths globally – down from 8,900 in 1990.[11] Death occurs in about 1 per 60,000 cases.[4] Chickenpox was not separated from smallpox until the late 19th century.[4] In 1888 its connection to shingles was determined.[4] The first documented use of the term chicken pox was in 1658.[12] Various explanations have been suggested for the use of "chicken" in the name, one being the relative mildness of the disease.[12]

Signs and symptoms

A single blister, typical during the early stages of the rash
The early (prodromal) symptoms in adolescents and adults are nausea, loss of appetite, aching muscles, and headache. This is followed by the characteristic rash or oral sores, malaise, and a low-grade fever that signal the presence of the disease. Oral manifestations of the disease (enanthem) not uncommonly may precede the external rash (exanthem). In children the illness is not usually preceded by prodromal symptoms, and the first sign is the rash or the spots in the oral cavity. The rash begins as small red dots on the face, scalp, torso, upper arms and legs; progressing over 10–12 hours to small bumps, blisters and pustules; followed by umbilication and the formation of scabs.[13][14]

At the blister stage, intense itching is usually present. Blisters may also occur on the palms, soles, and genital area. Commonly, visible evidence of the disease develops in the oral cavity and tonsil areas in the form of small ulcers which can be painful or itchy or both; this enanthem (internal rash) can precede the exanthem (external rash) by 1 to 3 days or can be concurrent. These symptoms of chickenpox appear 10 to 21 days after exposure to a contagious person. Adults may have a more widespread rash and longer fever, and they are more likely to experience complications, such as varicella pneumonia.[13]

Because watery nasal discharge containing live virus usually precedes both exanthem (external rash) and enanthem (oral ulcers) by 1 to 2 days, the infected person actually becomes contagious one to two days before recognition of the disease. Contagiousness persists until all vesicular lesions have become dry crusts (scabs), which usually entails four or five days, by which time nasal shedding of live virus ceases.

The condition usually resolves by itself within a couple of weeks.[15] The rash may, however, last for up to one month, although the infectious stage does not last longer than a week or two.[citation needed]

Chickenpox is rarely fatal, although it is generally more severe in adult men than in women or children. Non-immune pregnant women and those with a suppressed immune system are at highest risk of serious complications. Arterial ischemic stroke (AIS) associated with chickenpox in the previous year accounts for nearly one third of childhood AIS.[16] The most common late complication of chickenpox is shingles (herpes zoster), caused by reactivation of the varicella zoster virus decades after the initial, often childhood, chickenpox infection.


The back of a 30-year-old male after five days of the rash
 

A 3-year-old girl with a chickenpox rash on her torso
 

A child with chickenpox at an orphanage in Howrah
 

Lower leg of a child with chickenpox
Pregnancy and neonates
During pregnancy the dangers to the fetus associated with a primary VZV infection are greater in the first six months. In the third trimester, the mother is more likely to have severe symptoms.[17] For pregnant women, antibodies produced as a result of immunization or previous infection are transferred via the placenta to the fetus.[18] Women who are immune to chickenpox cannot become infected and do not need to be concerned about it for themselves or their infant during pregnancy.[19]

Varicella infection in pregnant women could lead to spread via the placenta and infection of the fetus. If infection occurs during the first 28 weeks of gestation, this can lead to fetal varicella syndrome (also known as congenital varicella syndrome).[20] Effects on the fetus can range in severity from underdeveloped toes and fingers to severe anal and bladder malformation. Possible problems include:

Damage to brain: encephalitis,[21] microcephaly, hydrocephaly,[22] aplasia of brain
Damage to the eye: optic stalk, optic cup, and lens vesicles, microphthalmia, cataracts, chorioretinitis, optic atrophy
Other neurological disorder: damage to cervical and lumbosacral spinal cord, motor/sensory deficits, absent deep tendon reflexes, anisocoria/Horner's syndrome
Damage to body: hypoplasia of upper/lower extremities, anal and bladder sphincter dysfunction
Skin disorders: (cicatricial) skin lesions, hypopigmentation
Infection late in gestation or immediately following birth is referred to as "neonatal varicella".[23] Maternal infection is associated with premature delivery. The risk of the baby developing the disease is greatest following exposure to infection in the period 7 days before delivery and up to 8 days following the birth. The baby may also be exposed to the virus via infectious siblings or other contacts, but this is of less concern if the mother is immune. Newborns who develop symptoms are at a high risk of pneumonia and other serious complications of the disease.[24]

Diagnosis

Chickenpox.
The diagnosis of chickenpox is primarily based on the signs and symptom, with typical early symptoms followed by a characteristic rash. Confirmation of the diagnosis is by examination of the fluid within the vesicles of the rash, or by testing blood for evidence of an acute immunologic response.

Vesicular fluid can be examined with a Tzanck smear, or better by testing for direct fluorescent antibody. The fluid can also be "cultured", whereby attempts are made to grow the virus from a fluid sample. Blood tests can be used to identify a response to acute infection (IgM) or previous infection and subsequent immunity (IgG).[25]

Prenatal diagnosis of fetal varicella infection can be performed using ultrasound, though a delay of 5 weeks following primary maternal infection is advised. A PCR (DNA) test of the mother's amniotic fluid can also be performed, though the risk of spontaneous abortion due to the amniocentesis procedure is higher than the risk of the baby's developing fetal varicella syndrome.[24]

Pathophysiology
Main article: Varicella zoster virus
Exposure to VZV in a healthy child initiates the production of host immunoglobulin G (IgG), immunoglobulin M (IgM), and immunoglobulin A (IgA) antibodies; IgG antibodies persist for life and confer immunity. Cell-mediated immune responses are also important in limiting the scope and the duration of primary varicella infection. After primary infection, VZV is hypothesized to spread from mucosal and epidermal lesions to local sensory nerves. VZV then remains latent in the dorsal ganglion cells of the sensory nerves. Reactivation of VZV results in the clinically distinct syndrome of herpes zoster (i.e., shingles), postherpetic neuralgia,[26] and sometimes Ramsay Hunt syndrome type II.[27] Varicella zoster can affect the arteries in the neck and head, producing stroke, either during childhood, or after a latency period of many years.[28]

Shingles
Main article: Herpes zoster
After a chickenpox infection, the virus remains dormant in the body's nerve tissues. The immune system keeps the virus at bay, but later in life, usually in an adult, it can be reactivated and cause a different form of the viral infection called shingles (also known as herpes zoster).[29] The United States Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) suggests that every adult over the age of 60 years get the herpes zoster vaccine.[30]

Shingles affects one in five adults infected with chickenpox as children, especially those who are immune suppressed, particularly from cancer, HIV, or other conditions. Stress can bring on shingles as well, although scientists are still researching the connection.[31] Shingles are most commonly found in adults over the age of 60 who were diagnosed with chickenpox when they were under the age of 1.[32]

Prevention
Hygiene measures
The spread of chickenpox can be prevented by isolating affected individuals. Contagion is by exposure to respiratory droplets, or direct contact with lesions, within a period lasting from three days before the onset of the rash, to four days after the onset of the rash.[33] The chickenpox virus is susceptible to disinfectants, notably chlorine bleach (i.e., sodium hypochlorite). Like all enveloped viruses, it is sensitive to desiccation, heat and detergents.

Vaccine
Main article: Varicella vaccine
The varicella vaccine is recommended in many countries.[8] Some countries require the varicella vaccination or an exemption before entering elementary school. A second dose is recommended five years after the initial immunization.[34] A vaccinated person is likely to have a milder case of chickenpox if they become infected.[35] Immunization within three days of exposure may improve outcomes in children.[9]

It is part of the routine immunization schedule in the US.[36] Some European countries include it as part of universal vaccinations in children,[37] but not all countries provide the vaccine due to its cost.[8] In the UK as of 2014, the vaccine is only recommended in people who are particularly vulnerable to chickenpox.[38] In populations that have not been immunized or if immunity is questionable, a clinician may order an Enzyme immunoassay. An immunoessay measures the levels of antibodies against the virus that give immunity to a person. If the levels of antibodies are low (low titer) or questionable, reimmuization may be done.[39]

Treatment
Treatment mainly consists of easing the symptoms. As a protective measure, people are usually required to stay at home while they are infectious to avoid spreading the disease to others. Cutting the nails short or wearing gloves may prevent scratching and minimize the risk of secondary infections.

Although there have been no formal clinical studies evaluating the effectiveness of topical application of calamine lotion (a topical barrier preparation containing zinc oxide, and one of the most commonly used interventions), it has an excellent safety profile.[40] It is important to maintain good hygiene and daily cleaning of skin with warm water to avoid secondary bacterial infection.[41] Scratching may also increase the risk of secondary infection.[42]

Paracetamol (acetaminophen) but not aspirin may be used to reduce fever. Aspirin use by someone with chickenpox may cause the serious, sometimes fatal disease of the liver and brain, Reye syndrome. People at risk of developing severe complications who have had significant exposure to the virus may be given intra-muscular varicella zoster immune globulin (VZIG), a preparation containing high titres of antibodies to varicella zoster virus, to ward off the disease.[43][44]

Antivirals are sometimes used.[45][46]

Children
If oral acyclovir is started within 24 hours of rash onset, it decreases symptoms by one day but has no effect on complication rates.[47][48] Use of acyclovir therefore is not currently recommended for individuals with normal immune function. Children younger than 12 years old and older than one month are not meant to receive antiviral medication unless they have another medical condition which puts them at risk of developing complications.[49]

Treatment of chickenpox in children is aimed at symptoms while the immune system deals with the virus. With children younger than 12 years, cutting nails and keeping them clean is an important part of treatment as they are more likely to scratch their blisters more deeply than adults.[50]

Aspirin is highly contraindicated in children younger than 16 years, as it has been related to Reye's syndrome.[51]

Adults
Infection in otherwise healthy adults tends to be more severe.[52] Treatment with antiviral drugs (e.g. acyclovir or valacyclovir) is generally advised, as long as it is started within 24–48 hours from rash onset.[49] Remedies to ease the symptoms of chickenpox in adults are basically the same as those used for children. Adults are more often prescribed antiviral medication, as it is effective in reducing the severity of the condition and the likelihood of developing complications. Antiviral medicines do not kill the virus but stop it from multiplying. Adults are advised to increase water intake to reduce dehydration and to relieve headaches. Painkillers such as paracetamol (acetaminophen) are recommended, as they are effective in relieving itching and other symptoms such as fever or pains. Antihistamines relieve itching and may be used in cases where the itching prevents sleep, because they also act as a sedative. As with children, antiviral medication is considered more useful for those adults who are more prone to develop complications. These include pregnant women or people who have a weakened immune system.[53]

Sorivudine, a nucleoside analogue, has been reported to be effective in the treatment of primary varicella in healthy adults (case reports only), but large-scale clinical trials are still needed to demonstrate its efficacy.[54]

After recovering from chickenpox, it is recommended by doctors that adults take one injection of VZV immune globulin and one injection of varicella vaccine or herpes zoster vaccine.[citation needed]

Prognosis
The duration of the visible blistering caused by varicella zoster virus varies in children usually from 4 to 7 days, and the appearance of new blisters begins to subside after the fifth day. Chickenpox infection is milder in young children, and symptomatic treatment, with sodium bicarbonate baths or antihistamine medication may ease itching. It is recommended to keep new infants from birth up to age 6 months away from an infected person for 10 to 21 days because their immune systems are not developed enough to handle the stress it can bring on.[55] Paracetamol (acetaminophen) is widely used to reduce fever. Aspirin, or products containing aspirin, should not be given to children with chickenpox, as it can cause Reye's Syndrome.[56]

In adults, the disease is more severe,[57] though the incidence is much less common. Infection in adults is associated with greater morbidity and mortality due to pneumonia (either direct viral pneumonia or secondary bacterial pneumonia),[58] bronchitis (either viral bronchitis or secondary bacterial bronchitis),[58] hepatitis,[59] and encephalitis.[60] In particular, up to 10% of pregnant women with chickenpox develop pneumonia, the severity of which increases with onset later in gestation. In England and Wales, 75% of deaths due to chickenpox are in adults.[24] Inflammation of the brain, or encephalitis, can occur in immunocompromised individuals, although the risk is higher with herpes zoster.[61] Necrotizing fasciitis is also a rare complication.[62]

Varicella can be lethal to adults with impaired immunity. The number of people in this high-risk group has increased, due to the HIV epidemic and the increased use of immunosuppressive therapies.[63] Varicella is a particular problem in hospitals, when there are patients with immune systems weakened by drugs (e.g., high-dose steroids) or HIV.[64]

Secondary bacterial infection of skin lesions, manifesting as impetigo, cellulitis, and erysipelas, is the most common complication in healthy children. Disseminated primary varicella infection usually seen in the immunocompromised may have high morbidity. Ninety percent of cases of varicella pneumonia occur in the adult population. Rarer complications of disseminated chickenpox include myocarditis, hepatitis, and glomerulonephritis.[65]

Hemorrhagic complications are more common in the immunocompromised or immunosuppressed populations, although healthy children and adults have been affected. Five major clinical syndromes have been described: febrile purpura, malignant chickenpox with purpura, postinfectious purpura, purpura fulminans, and anaphylactoid purpura. These syndromes have variable courses, with febrile purpura being the most benign of the syndromes and having an uncomplicated outcome. In contrast, malignant chickenpox with purpura is a grave clinical condition that has a mortality rate of greater than 70%. The cause of these hemorrhagic chickenpox syndromes is not known.[65]

Epidemiology
Primary varicella occurs in all countries worldwide. In 2013 the disease resulted in 7,000 deaths – down from 8,900 in 1990.[11]

In temperate countries, chickenpox is primarily a disease of children, with most cases occurring during the winter and spring, most likely due to school contact. It is one of the classic diseases of childhood, with the highest prevalence in the 4–10-year-old age group. Like rubella, it is uncommon in preschool children. Varicella is highly communicable, with an infection rate of 90% in close contacts. In temperate countries, most people become infected before adulthood, and 10% of young adults remain susceptible.

In the tropics, chickenpox often occurs in older people and may cause more serious disease.[66] In adults, the pock marks are darker and the scars more prominent than in children.[67]

In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) does not require state health departments to report infections of chickenpox, and only 31 states currently volunteer this information.[68] However, in a 2013 study conducted by the social media disease surveillance tool called Sickweather, anecdotal reports of chickenpox infections on Facebook and Twitter were used to measure and rank states with the most infections per capita, with Maryland, Tennessee and Illinois in the top three.[69]

Etymology
Why the term was used is not clear but it may be due to it being a relatively mild disease.[12] It has been said to be derived from chickpeas, based on resemblance of the vesicles to chickpeas,[12][70][71] or to come from the rash resembling chicken pecks.[71] Other suggestions include the designation chicken for a child (i.e., literally 'child pox'), a corruption of itching-pox,[70][72] or the idea that the disease may have originated in chickens.[73] Samuel Johnson explained the designation as "from its being of no very great danger."[74]

Society and culture
Because chickenpox is usually more severe in adults than it is in children, some parents deliberately expose their children to the virus, sometimes by taking them to "chickenpox parties." Doctors counter that children are safer getting the vaccine, which is a weakened form of the virus, than getting the disease, which can be fatal.[75]

Other animals
Humans are the only known animal that the disease affects naturally.[4] However, chickenpox has been caused in other primates, including chimpanzees[76] and gorillas.[77]

If you have never had chickenpox or chickenpox vaccine, typical symptoms are:

fever
blister-like rash with severe itching all over the body
loss of appetite
tiredness
If you have been vaccinated for chickenpox, some people can still get the disease, but it is usually mild with fewer blisters and low or no fever.

In 2012, a 4-year-old girl with leukemia died from chickenpox. People with weakened immune systems are more likely to get a serious case of chickenpox and may not be able to get the chickenpox vaccine. That’s why it’s important that these people be protected by herd immunity, meaning those who can’t get vaccinated are protected because those who can get vaccinated do. Herd immunity helps slow and can even stop the spread of disease, so there is a smaller chance that those who are not protected come into contact with the disease.

You can protect others by staying up-to-date on your vaccines. You should get two doses of chickenpox vaccine to prevent chickenpox.
Chickenpox causes spots (a rash) and can make a child feel generally unwell. Treatment aims to ease symptoms until the illness goes. Full recovery is usual in children. Serious complications are rare but are more likely to occur in children with a poor immune system, such as those on chemotherapy.

What is chickenpox?
chickenpox blisters
Chickenpox is an infection caused by the varicella-zoster virus. Most children have chickenpox at some stage. Most commonly, children get chickenpox before the age of 10. The immune system makes proteins called antibodies during the infection. These fight the virus and then provide lifelong protection against it (immunity). Therefore, it is uncommon to have more than one bout of chickenpox in your lifetime.

Chickenpox symptoms
High temperature (fever), aches and headache often start a day or so before a rash appears.
Spots (rash). Spots appear in crops. They develop into small blisters and are itchy. They can be anywhere on the body. Several crops may develop over several days. Some children may be covered in spots; others have only a few or even none. The rash starts off looking like red spots, which then blister, and then scab over.
Loss of appetite or feeding problems.
chickenpox scabbing
Some children feel quite unwell for a few days. Others appear only mildly ill. Most are much better within a week. The blisters dry up and scab. They gradually fade, but may take up to two weeks to go completely.

What are the possible complications?
The spots do not usually scar unless they are badly scratched.
Some spots become infected with germs (bacteria) in some cases. This is the most common complication in children. If this occurs, the surrounding skin becomes red and sore. Antibiotics in the form of creams or medicine may then be needed.
Inflammation of the lung (pneumonia) and inflammation of the brain (encephalitis) are rare complications.
Vary rarely, other serious complications develop. For example:
Reye's syndrome. (a very rare condition with brain and liver problems).
Inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis).
Kidney inflammation (glomerulonephritis).
Appendicitis.
Ataxia (problems co-ordinating movements).
Inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis).
Henoch-Schönlein purpura (a condition that can affect the kidneys).
Inflammation of the testes (orchitis).
Inflammation of the joints (arthritis).
Inflammation of various parts of the eye.
Therefore, although serious complications are rare, it is best to be watchful. See a doctor if your child develops any worrying symptoms that you are unsure about such as:

Breathing problems.
Weakness such as a child becoming wobbly on his/her feet.
Drowsiness.
Fits (convulsions).
Pains or headaches which become worse despite paracetamol.
Being unable to take fluids, due to a severe rash in the mouth.
A severe rash, or a rash which bruises or bleeds into the skin (haemorrhagic rash).
Becoming generally more and more unwell.
Shingles
Shingles is caused by the same virus that causes chickenpox and is a very delayed complication of chickenpox. Anyone who has had chickenpox in the past may develop shingles. Shingles is an infection of a nerve and the area of skin supplied by the nerve. It causes a rash and pain in a local band-like area along the affected nerve. About 1 in 5 people have shingles at some time in their lives. It can occur at any age, but it is most common in people over the age of 50.

The reason why shingles may occur is because the virus does not completely go after you have chickenpox. Some virus particles remain inactive in the nerve roots next to your spinal cord. They do no harm there, and cause no symptoms. For reasons that are not clear, the virus may begin to multiply again (reactivate). This is often years later. The reactivated virus travels along the nerve to the skin to cause shingles. See separate leaflet called Shingles (Herpes Zoster) for details.

Note: you can catch chickenpox from being exposed to a person with shingles if you have not had chickenpox yourself. However, you cannot catch shingles from a person with chickenpox, or catch shingles from a person with shingles.

Related discussions
Guest
Chicken Pox at 29... what the?!
Guest
41replies
moggycat
Exposure with chicken pox
moggycat
2replies
barbiegrrrl
arghhh timing
barbiegrrrl
0replies
Start a discussion 
What is the treatment for chickenpox?
For most children
Treatment is mainly aimed at easing symptoms and trying to make your child as comfortable as possible whilst the immune system deals with the virus:

Advice on dealing with a high temperature (fever) is detailed below.
A soothing cream (emollient) may help the itch. Calamine lotion is the one most used, although it is not known how effective it is.
A sedating antihistamine (in a tablet or liquid medicine) may help with sleep if itch is a problem. This can be used in children over 1 year old. Give a dose at bedtime. You can buy these at pharmacies or get them on prescription. Chlorphenamine (Piriton®) is the one most used.
Keep fingernails cut short to stop deep scratching.
Dress children comfortably so they are not cold or overheated. Use cool smooth fabrics such as cotton.
Dealing with a fever. A fever commonly occurs with chickenpox, and may make your child feel uncomfortable and irritable. The following are things that you can do that may bring the temperature down and make your child feel more comfortable:

You can give paracetamol to lower a temperature. You can buy paracetamol in liquid form, or melt-in-the-mouth tablets, for children. It comes in various brand names. The dose for each age is given with the medicine packet.
Note: paracetamol does not treat the cause of the fever. It merely helps to ease discomfort. It also eases headaches, and aches and pains. You do not need to use paracetamol if your child is comfortable and not distressed by the fever, aches or pains.
Note: ibuprofen has been used with paracetamol in the past. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has recommended that ibuprofen is no longer used for chickenpox. 
Take extra layers of clothes off your child if the room is normal room temperature. It is wrong to wrap up a feverish child. The aim is to prevent overheating or shivering.
Give lots to drink. This helps to prevent a lack of fluid in the body (dehydration). You might find that a child is more willing to have a good drink if they are not so irritable. So, if they are not keen to drink, it may help to give some paracetamol first. Then, try the child with drinks half an hour or so later when his/her temperature is likely to have come down.
Do not cold-sponge a child who has a fever. This used to be popular, but it is now not advised. This is because the blood vessels under the skin become narrower (constrict) if the water is too cold. This reduces heat loss and can trap heat in deeper parts of the body. The child may then get worse. Many children also find cold-sponging uncomfortable.

Some people use a fan to cool a child. Again, this may not be a good idea if the fanned air is too cold. However, a gentle flow of air in a room which is room temperature may be helpful. Perhaps just open the window or use a fan on the other side of the room to keep the air circulating.

For special at-risk groups
Some children have a higher risk of developing complications from chickenpox. In addition to the above treatments, they may need extra treatment such as aciclovir (an antiviral medicine) or vaccination. If your child has not already had chickenpox and is in one in the following groups, you should see a doctor urgently if they have contact with chickenpox, or have symptoms of it:

Children (babies) less than 1 month old.
Children with a poor immune system. For example, children with leukaemia, immune diseases or HIV/AIDS.
Children taking certain medication such as steroids, immune-suppressing medication or chemotherapy.
Children with severe heart or lung disease.
Children with severe skin conditions.
Antiviral medication is also used for adults and teenagers who develop chickenpox, as they too have a higher risk of complications. However, antiviral medication is not normally advised for healthy children aged over 1 month and under 12 years who develop chickenpox.

Dr. Sarah Jarvis
Childhood diseases that can strike adults
All about shingles
Shingles vaccine - why?
Immunisation - not just for kids!
Read more blog posts 
Is chickenpox infectious?
A person with chickenpox is very infectious. The virus spreads in the air from person to person. For example, if you have not already had chickenpox, you stand a good chance of catching it if:

You are in the same room as someone with chickenpox for more than 15 minutes; or
You have any face-to-face contact with someone with chickenpox, such as a conversation.
Nine in ten people who have not had chickenpox would catch it after being exposed in this way.

It takes between 7 and 21 days (most commonly 10-14 days) to develop symptoms after catching the virus (the incubation period).

Protecting others
A person with chickenpox is infectious from two days before the spots first appear until they have all crusted over (commonly about five days after onset of the rash). A child with chickenpox should stay off school or nursery for five days from the onset of the rash. Also, whilst infectious, they should keep away from at-risk people who may develop a severe illness if they get chickenpox. These include:

Pregnant women who have not had chickenpox in the past. Chickenpox can be severe and cause complications during pregnancy.
People with a poorly functioning immune system. For example, people with leukaemia, with HIV/AIDS, on steroid medication, or who are having chemotherapy.
The at-risk children listed earlier.
Healthy adults who have not had chickenpox may also want to avoid catching it, as the illness tends to be worse in adults.

Note: people with chickenpox should not travel by air until all the spots have crusted over.

Related articles
Chickenpox in Adults and Teenagers
Chickenpox Contact and Pregnancy
School Exclusion Times
More related content 
Are you a healthcare worker?
Healthcare workers come into contact with people with poor immune systems, pregnant women and newborn babies. They should be aware that if they catch chickenpox, they can be infectious for two days before a rash or illness appears, and be a risk to patients. So, if you are a healthcare worker and come into contact with someone who has chickenpox (or who develops it within the next two days), then:

If you have been immunised against chickenpox, or have definitely had chickenpox in the past, you are likely to be immune. You should continue working, but contact your occupational health department if you feel unwell or develop a rash.
If you are uncertain about whether you have had chickenpox or been immunised, you should have a test to see if you are immune. If you are not immune you should:
Avoid contact with high-risk patients for 8-21 days after the contact.
Report to occupational health before patient contact if you feel unwell or develop a high temperature (fever) or rash.
Get immunised against the chickenpox virus (the varicella-zoster virus).
Is there a vaccine against chickenpox?
Yes, there is a vaccine that protects against the virus that causes chickenpox. It is part of the routine childhood immunisation programme in certain countries such as the USA, Canada and Australia. Currently, there are no plans to make immunisation against chickenpox routine for children in the UK. In the UK, the vaccine is offered by the NHS to certain groups. For example, healthcare workers who are not immune to chickenpox. Also, to people who are not immune to chickenpox and who are in close contact with people with a poor immune system. For example, brothers and sisters of children on chemotherapy.

Should I let my child catch chickenpox?
Some parents encourage their children to mix with others who have chickenpox in order to catch it.

Related Wellbeing
Shingles vaccination: should I have the jab or not?
Millions more protected against disease through improved vaccination programme
See all Wellbeing 
Some arguments for this
Chickenpox is usually a milder illness in a child than in an adult.
The risk of serious complications is higher in adults. In particular, chickenpox during pregnancy can cause serious complications to both mother and baby.
Most people get chickenpox at some stage. As the risks are fewer if you have it as a child, it may be better to get it over with.
Some arguments against this
"I could not willingly let my child develop an illness."
Although rare, some children do have serious complications.
Different parents have different views on this issue. And remember, children who develop chickenpox spots (the rash) today will have been just as infectious over the previous two days when they were well, but were incubating the virus.

Also note: if someone in the family or home is temporarily at high risk of complications (listed earlier - pregnant women, etc) then it is best to put off deliberately catching it.
People who have had chickenpox almost always develop lifetime immunity (meaning you are extremely unlikely to get it again). However, the virus remains dormant in the body and it can reactivate later in life and cause shingles.

What causes chickenpox?

Chickenpox is caused by the herpes varicella-zoster virus. It is spread by droplets from a sneeze or cough, or by contact with the clothing, bed linens or oozing blisters of an infected person. The onset of symptoms is 10 to 21 days after exposure. The disease is most contagious a day or two before the rash appears and until the rash is completely dry and scabbed over.

What are the symptoms of chickenpox?

Chickenpox appears as a very itchy rash that spreads from the torso to the neck, face and limbs. Lasting seven to 10 days, the rash progresses from red bumps to fluid-filled blisters (vesicles) that drain and scab over. Vesicles may also appear in the mouth, on the scalp, around the eyes or on the genitals and can be very painful.

This cycle repeats itself in new areas of the body until finally, after about two weeks, all of the sores have healed. The disease is contagious until all the spots have dried up. Unfortunately, the virus is also contagious for at least one day before the rash breaks out.

Seek medical advice about chickenpox if:

You think your child has chickenpox. A doctor can confirm your diagnosis.
Chickenpox is accompanied by severe skin pain and the rash produces a greenish discharge and the surrounding skin becomes red, which are signs of a secondary bacterial skin infection.
Chickenpox is accompanied by a stiff neck, persistent sleepiness or lethargy as these are symptoms of a more serious illness such as meningitis or encephalitis. Get medical help immediately.
Your child is recovering from chickenpox and begins running a fever, vomiting, having convulsions or is drowsy. Get medical help immediately.
An adult family member gets chickenpox.
You are pregnant, have never had chickenpox and are exposed to the disease. Your unborn child may be at risk so seek medical advice without delay.
What are the treatments for chickenpox?

Chickenpox is extremely contagious. Keep your child at home until all of the blisters have burst and crusted over.

Most cases of chickenpox require little or no treatment beyond treating the symptoms.

The prescription antiviral drug aciclovir is effective for shortening the duration of chickenpox symptoms and may be recommended for certain people with chickenpox, such as pregnant women, those with a weakened immune system, and adults who seek medical advice within 24 hours of the rash appearing.

In addition, your doctor may recommend over-the-counter painkillers and an antihistamine to relieve pain, itching and swelling. Antibiotics are called for if a secondary bacterial skin infection arises or if the person with chickenpox develops bacterial pneumonia.

